[+sections]
At the end of last summer, Anthony Kane was offered his dream job. 

He spent the previous eight years managing residence halls and staff at Duquesne University. Now, the college was tapping him, a X-year-old Black man, to be its new director of diversity and inclusion.

It was not going to be easy. 

The murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis spurred months of protests and calls for racial reckoning across institutions. Students were already grappling with the grief of a global pandemic and anticipating a tense presidential election that would set the national tone on social justice reform.

Before Kane’s first day, he reached back to connections he’d made with student leaders at clubs like the Black Student Union. He wanted to hear what they thought needed to be done.

“The first thing I knew was I needed to fit into this role from an authentic space,” Kane said.

Students wanted to be included in his work, to participate in planning programs and events meant to make the campus more inclusive, not just receive emails about negative incidents on campus.

Kane’s challenge is one facing university leaders across the country. As universities respond to calls for reform, staff in diversity and inclusion offices can be a powerful connection between institutions that are often siloed and slow-moving and the students demanding changes in campus culture.

Yvette Alex-Assensoh, a national voice on equity work from the University of Oregon, said colleges and universities need to go beyond statements and realize that all levels of the institution impact equity — from the final decision-makers to the types of research conducted and how and what students learn. 

“We need to make sure that we are the kind of institution where we are not symbolically and provocatively having our knees on the neck of students and faculty members because we're not hearing that they can't breathe,” said Alex-Assensoh, who serves as the university’s vice president of equity and inclusion.

A year after the start of protests for racial justice, PublicSource examined diversity and inclusion efforts at four Pittsburgh-area campuses and how staff are working to empower students.

{.subhed}
img: 
alt: 
text: Relying on existing structures: Using momentum of protests 
{} 

Kane quickly realized his work would intersect with his own experiences. To help others overcome a challenging year, he set out goals for his new role while also practicing self-care. 

That’s an issue facing staff at other universities as they balance their own realities as members of marginalized communities while trying to bring meaningful change to campus.

As a Black woman with Black children, Ayana Ledford did not see Floyd’s murder as one exceptional act of violence but as an unsettling incident that has happened countless times before. 

“So it wasn't brand new for me,” said Ledford, who will be promoted in July to associate dean of diversity, equity and inclusion in the Dietrich College of Humanities and Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University. “It wasn't some brand new heartbreak of racial divisions in our country. It has always existed.” 

Ledford,, realized the protests for racial justice also showed the university’s majority-white population how anti-Blackness can result in tragedies like the killings of Floyd or Breonna Taylor in Kentucky. 

Ledford saw her own college community stand up and seek out ways to help. 

{.inline-img-right}
img: https://www.publicsource.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Justice-Protest-Layered-Photo-and-Text-Collage-Copy-2.png
alt: #
{}

“It provides an opportunity in essence that I end up with an increase of individuals wanting to participate,” she said. 

Facing ongoing injustice, Ottley wanted more than just a conversation. 

She realized just how isolating it could be to be one of the few Black students in classes where the first Black woman neurosurgeon was not mentioned and students had to ask for time off whenever another Black person was killed.

The killing of another Black man by a police officer galvanized cries for social justice.  

“I speak of this perpetual cycle that Black students are constantly in,” Ottley said. ”The way this kind of works is that something happens. Black students complain. Administration kind of goes like, ‘Oh, we hear you. Let's meet and let's talk about it.’”

Black student organizations at Pitt created a list of demands, which include calls to train faculty and staff on issues like racial biases and micro-assaults, increase Black faculty by 10% over the next four years, expand mental health resources to Black students and establish scholarships for Black students in the name of Antwon Rose II, who was killed by an East Pittsburgh police officer in June 2018.

The Pitt administration met with student leaders. By April, Ottley said many of the demands were met, though some — like severing the ties with police and creating a scholarship fund — did not go through. 

The university created anti-racism series and resources, hosted events and workshops, required an anti-Black racist course for first-year students, expanded Black student leadership roles with administration and added scholarships for Black medical students.  

Ottley said there is more work to be done but is heartened by the steps so far to improve experiences for Black students. 

{.inline-img-left}
img: https://www.publicsource.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Justice-Protest-Layered-Photo-and-Text-Collage-Copy-7-2.png
alt: #
{}

Her sentiments were echoed by Vice Chancellor and Chief Diversity Equity and Inclusion Officer  Clyde Pickett. In an email statement, he said efforts by the university will be reflected in the new strategic plan to help improve access for students and staff.

“And it will be my job to continue to challenge the University to lead the way not only in self-reflection, but on broad actions to promote sustainable change. Being fully committed to this work requires ongoing and sustained assessment and action. There will always be areas to improve upon,” Pickett said.

A demand for change was also sparked by Black professors. 

At Carnegie Mellon University [CMU], two English professors co-wrote an essay in June that called out universities for not doing enough to truly fight racism, especially to better serve Black communities. 

Part of the motivation was after Richard Purcell, a tenured professor at the university for over 10 years, discovered that his edits and comments seemed to be left out of a response sent out by the dean of the Dietrich College of Humanities and Sciences. 

“I was very animated during our deliberations about the statement that we actually have something with teeth and say something meaningful, or say nothing at all,” said Purcell, who felt upset that his scholarly knowledge and personal life experiences were not considered. 

For him, the frustration went beyond CMU to include other higher education institutions that he feels showed a lack of bravery in acknowledging the state of police violence in the country. 

“These are things that have been studied over and over and over again whether it’s instances and percentages of Black and brown people being killed by police — it’s not as if this is opinion,” Purcell said. 

Dean Richard Scheines at the college explained that seeing the footage of Floyd sent him back to his childhood sitting in front of the television and watching protests during the 1960s. He wanted to send out a meaningful message.

“The energy that developed around the murder was complicated and very intense — despair, anger, outrage, hope that this might finally cause a reckoning, fear, you name it,” he said in a statement to PublicSource. 

Jason England, an assistant creative writing professor who said he was not asked to help with president’s  statement, collaborated with Purcell.

“Beyond my background in civil rights, certainly my upbringing is very similar to the sort of Black people who are being harassed by police and killed on a regular basis,” England said.

Scheines said t

The article posted by the two professors provided thought-provoking questions around how universities discuss racism, Scheines said, and why those responses can be ineffective, Scheines said. 

“We need to find ways to act effectively to improve our own communities — and it needs to be a priority,” Scheines said in a statement. “On that we agree.”

After their essay was published, the college invited them to contribute to committees in an effort to address concerns of racism and increase equity. England now advises the department’s dean, and Purcell co-chairs the diversity, equity and inclusion [DEI] efforts at the department. 

CMU has made some progress. In January, the university announced Wanda Heading-Grant as vice provost for diversity, equity and Inclusion and chief diversity officer. 

Since the summer, the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences worked on initiatives like hosting town halls and other meetings to talk about inequality and racism, hiring new faculty from underrepresented backgrounds and creating new fellowships to diversify the graduate program, starting with a cohort of 10 students. 

But looking back over the year, Purcell said more needs to be done. 

For example, he believes the language used by the university still lacks specificity and courage when addressing issues of white supremacy and anti-Blackness. But he can talk openly in his classes about historical concepts like abolitionism. 

The movement began with Black men and women resisting enslavement and has evolved more recently to encompass calls to end incarceration and law enforcement.

But for a university, Purcell questions if they could use the more direct language without creating a PR crisis. 

“My job is to pursue knowledge. I think a university's job is to attract students — it’s a business. There’s a desire to engage in these conversations, but always in a safe way.” 

England cautions universities to not just rely on what he considers “the script,” canned language meant to make people feel more welcome, like mails with terminology like BIPOC (Black Indigenous and people of color) or discussing trigger warnings. Though these terms can be useful, England questioned if it really creates fundamental change. 

“That’s what frustrates me because I don't care if you call me a BIPOC or a person of color or whatever else,” he said. “It doesn’t get more Black people on campus, and it doesn’t make them feel safer when they have to walk the streets of Pittsburgh and worry about racism or police or whatever their concerns might be.

“We can’t change the world through ever-shifting terminology that continues to say the same thing in a different way,” he said.

<b>The Village: Creating more than a virtual space</b>

In a meeting with other faculty, students and Duquesne University administrators, Quincy Stephenson heard a Black student share how he did not know how to process the pain without a space on campus to let out his feelings and emotions. 

Stephenson, the assistant director and outreach coordinator at the university wellness center, decided to create such a meeting space with a wellness organization called “The Village.”. 

There, Black students could learn how to heal, how to handle trauma and stress and how to be unapologetically themselves.

These efforts all have to be intentional, Stephenson said. 

As a Black man working in mental health, he seeks a balance for his own well-being while trying to offer ways for the Black community to heal. 

The group began last summer, and Stephenson said on average three to four students will sign on to informally talk and share their feelings, especially when another tragedy happens. In light of the guilty verdict of Derek Chauvin for murdering George Floyd, Stephenson emphasized that Black students should be intentional in how exposed they are to the news. 

To avoid exposure to traumatic Black suffering, Stephenson said he did not tune in to broadcast news about the trial but instead caught up by reading an article or two.

When he heard the jury’s decision, he felt the weight of the guilty verdict. Only days before the verdict, a police officer killed a Black man just miles from the courthouse. 

Stephenson did not just see Daunte Wright. He saw his own students. So he reminded his students that it was OK to take a step back and to not necessarily tune in to every update on the trial or attend another protest. It’s difficult to fight and heal at the same time.

“We've been doing it for so long that it's just normal behavior,” he said. "When somebody cuts you, you typically take time to allow the wound to heal. But because we've been going for so long, we've become accustomed to fighting and trying to heal at the same time."

Invisible labor: The toll of speaking up 

This past year has been emotionally taxing for many. But despite the burden, Black students kept speaking up.

LemLem Gamble, a junior at Washington & Jefferson, is used to having tough conversations as a way to offer more perspective for others, she said. At her school, there aren’t many other Black students. 

When Gamble got a text from her lacrosse coach checking in on her at the beginning of the summer, she saw an opportunity to talk to her team and make a more meaningful difference on a personal level. 

“Living those experiences can literally be trauma,” she said. “Every time I sit down with someone and talk about something I'm reliving that trauma for them because I think it's worth it for me to be sad for like 30 minutes if that affects their entire worldview.” 

Because there are not many other students of color on campus, Gamble said she has to water down her own experiences when talking to white people in an attempt to better reach them.

Lisha White, a doctoral student at Carnegie Mellon, also found herself at the precipice of change at her university. 

Along with other student leaders, White wrote a letter to the president calling for action like the hiring of more diverse faculty and ending the university's relationships with local police.

While leading the Black Graduate Student Organization, White still had her duties to her research and had to balance high expectations at the university and push for change.

“I’m not going to lie, it was not easy,” she said. 

Her other executive board helped keep members up to date on everything happening. But still, White was the representative to attend meetings with faculty, the provost and the university president. 

Despite the many different experiences others may have, she felt pressure to speak up for all Black graduate students despite enjoying being more in the background.

“But now having to express my opinions about things and then also weighing what was being said because ultimately it's my opinion,” she said and though she was encouraged to speak from her own perspective, she wanted to make sure others felt properly represented.

At CMU, Black students only make up 2.8% of the student population, according to Data USA.

White leaned on her board for support, she said. She considers them family.

“Sometimes it can be difficult to find people that are like-minded and going through the same struggle that also look like you,” she said. 

For the majority of her fall semester at Pitt, Ottley researched her senior thesis, worked for hours at a university lab each week, then would head back to her apartment to jump on a Zoom call and share her experience as a Black student with other students, administrators or faculty who wanted to talk — all with little energy to spare.

Now that she has graduated, Ottley wonders how she even got through the year. 

“There were days when I just wanted to exist,” she said. “I just wanted to just be a human, without having to explain to someone what I was going through or without having to be in a meeting with someone asking me, ‘OK, so what's your experience been like?’”

At times she could feel herself growing upset — an urge to tell others to just read the many published stories that quoted her instead of making her repeat her experiences at the university. 

Part of it was also understanding that she was no longer speaking about her own life, instead offering university leadership, faculty and other students a glimpse into what it is like to be a Black student. 

She asked herself: “If I don’t speak, then who will?” 
And it was not an easy task. 

To help cope, Ottley relied on her relationships as people in her life reminded her to think about who she was doing all this work for and what it could be like for future Black students at Pitt. 

She wants to see a campus where Black students are not only comfortable and safe but also feel acknowledged and happy.

After presenting her thesis, graduating with awards and speaking at her commencement ceremony, Ottley realized she made it through college and brought about change there.

“I know that my college career has been a struggle to say the least,” she said, “and so to kind of have that moment to be like, you persevered, you came out on the upper hand — you finished.” 

[]